doc: add feature deprecation and removal process to developer notes (#35337)
bitcoin/bitcoin: doc/developer-notes.md

  - *Rationale*: Changes in RPC JSON structure can break downstream application compatibility. Implementation of `deprecatedrpc` provides a grace period for downstream applications to migrate. Release notes provide notification to downstream users.

## Feature deprecation and removal process

Bitcoin Core uses a structured process for deprecating and removing features to give
downstream users and applications time to migrate.

### General principles

- The minimum deprecation **grace period** for a feature that is going to be removed is one
  major release.
- Any deprecation or removal must come with a release note.

> - Where possible, deprecated features should remain accessible via a re-enable flag during

Reviewer: Maybe this could go in RPC methods and fields section together with the instruction mentioning `-depractedrpc=<feature>`.

I don't think this apply for startup options. Do we have a re-enable flag on startup options? IIRC we only add `(Deprecated)` in the help message. (Or at least that's what I did in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31278)

  the grace period so downstream users are not immediately broken.

### RPC methods and fields

- To deprecate an entire RPC method, gate the old behavior behind `-deprecatedrpc=<feature>`.

> - The RPC help text must mention the deprecation, the intention of removal, and the

Reviewer 2: ", the intention of removal" that seems not practical, would just leave it out. The fact that it's deprecated is all the user needs to know.

Reviewer: I am ok with both sentences, will not oppose, but I can imagine some software relaying on the Bitcoin Core RPC, ignoring the deprecation alert and then complaining because some option was removed without informing.

Imho it is harmless to add a text mentioning when it will be removed if it will.

Reviewer 2: Bitcoin Core does not have a roadmap, so we do not know if/when something will be removed until it gains sufficient consensus after it's been proposed. That's why I think it's not practical.

Reviewer: There are times that we do know if it will. In those is when I think it is useful to indicate.
An example https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31278

I am not saying to always indicate the intetion, because maybe that's unknown, but if it is known, is useful for users to know when that option will stop being available.

  `-deprecatedrpc=<feature>` flag that re-enables it during the grace period.
  See [example RPC help](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/94f0adcc/src/rpc/blockchain.cpp#L1316-L1323)

>   and [#31278](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31278) as a worked example.

Reviewer 2: Just a single inlined example here would be more helpful

### Startup options

- To deprecate a startup option, emit a warning via `LogWarning` or `InitWarning` when the
  option is used, so users are notified at startup.
- Update the option's help text to indicate it is deprecated and, if applicable, will be
  removed in a future release.

### REST interface

- Deprecated REST endpoints or behaviors should be documented in `doc/REST-interface.md`
  with the version they were deprecated and, if planned, the intended removal version.

### ZMQ

- Deprecated ZMQ topics or behaviors should be documented in `doc/zmq.md` with the version

>   they were deprecated and, if planned, the intended removal version.

Reviewer 2: Would leave out the intended removal version here too, it's not practical.

  - *Rationale*: Changes in RPC JSON structure can break downstream application compatibility. Implementation of `deprecatedrpc` provides a grace period for downstream applications to migrate. Release notes provide notification to downstream users.

## Feature deprecation and removal process

Bitcoin Core uses a structured process for deprecating and removing features to give
downstream users and applications time to migrate.

### General principles

> - The deprecation **grace period** is one major release. A feature deprecated in version N

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The minimum deprecation **grace period** for a feature that is going to be removed is one major release. 
```
I suggest this change because we had a lot of debate about deprecating meaning removing in the future (specially during the op_return drama).
https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/32406#issuecomment-2861778194
And there are cases of options being undeprecated, see https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/32423

My definition of deprecating is that `the use of X feature is not recommended and should be avoided`. But that does not mean removal will happen.

But I do think that all removals need a deprecation (grace) period.

I think it is clear to state that here, as this is the position Core took in other cases, and I believe should continue be the case.

  is expected to be removed in version N+1.
- Deprecation must be announced in the release notes of the version in which it is introduced.

> - Removal must also be noted in the release notes of the version in which it occurs.

Reviewer: This can be simplified by just:

```suggestion
- Any deprecation or removal must come with a release note
```

Imo this notes should be as short and clear as possible because if not, people does not read them.

- Where possible, deprecated features should remain accessible via a re-enable flag during
  the grace period so downstream users are not immediately broken.

### RPC methods and fields

> - To deprecate an entire RPC method or a backward-incompatible change to an existing method,

Reviewer: I don't think this includes `backward-incompatible changes`. The scope should keep focused on deprecation.

Breaking changes are another different (and more complex) debate.

Reviewer 3: I don't see the difference, this is also mentioned in the pre-existing section directly above?

Reviewer: Fair enough, didn't see the pre-existing section.

In any case this duplicated the information provided in the section above. So we can maintain the scope to deprecation (I prefere this) or remove the previous section and move it here too.

>   gate the old behavior behind `-deprecatedrpc=<feature>`. During the grace period, users

Reviewer: I think this line can finish after `-deprecatedrpc=<feature>` to keep it short.

  must explicitly opt-in to the deprecated behavior using this flag.

> - The RPC help text must mention the deprecation, the planned removal version, and the

Reviewer: Not the planned removal version, but the intention of removal.
See as example: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/32406/changes#diff-b1e19192258d83199d8adaa5ac31f067af98f63554bfdd679bd8e8073815e69dR879

  `-deprecatedrpc=<feature>` flag that re-enables it during the grace period.
  See [example RPC help](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/94f0adcc/src/rpc/blockchain.cpp#L1316-L1323).

> - Include a release note pointing users to the RPC help for details.

Reviewer: That's already said in the general principles section

- In the removal release: remove the `-deprecatedrpc=` handling and the deprecated code path,

>   and note the removal in release notes. See [#31278](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31278)

Reviewer: same, this is in the general principles

  as a worked example.

### Startup options

- To deprecate a startup option, emit a warning via `LogWarning` or `InitWarning` when the
  option is used, so users are notified at startup.

> - Update the option's help text to indicate it is deprecated and will be removed in the next

Reviewer: `will be removed in a future release` only if that the case

  major release.

> - Include a release note.

Reviewer: already said in general principles

> - In the removal release: remove the option and its handling, and note the removal in release

Reviewer: seems duplicated

  notes.

### REST interface

- Deprecated REST endpoints or behaviors should be documented in `doc/REST-interface.md`

>   with the version they were deprecated and the planned removal version.

Reviewer: only if it is planned to be removed and if the version is defined

> - Include a release note.

Reviewer: also general principles

### ZMQ

- Deprecated ZMQ topics or behaviors should be documented in `doc/zmq.md` with the version

>   they were deprecated and the planned removal version.

Reviewer: same as other comments

> - Include a release note.

Reviewer: general principles

### Wallet settings

- Wallet settings exposed as RPC methods follow the [RPC deprecation process](#rpc-methods-and-fields).

> - Wallet settings exposed as startup options follow the [startup option process](#startup-options).

Reviewer 3: I think this section is already clear and can be removed.
